Product Requirements Document (PRD): Custom Meme Generator1. Product OverviewProduct Name: Custom Meme Generator
Purpose: A web-based application allowing users to select meme images from a predefined /memes/ folder, add multiple customizable text boxes, and export the result as a PNG file.
Target Audience: Meme creators, social media users, and casual content creators seeking a simple tool to customize pre-provided meme images.
Objective: Deliver an intuitive interface to select meme images, add custom text, and export as PNG, replicating core functionality of imgflip.com's meme generator.2. ScopeCore Functionality:Select meme images from a predefined project folder (/memes/).
Add multiple text boxes with customizable text, font size, color, and positioning.
Drag and resize text boxes on the image canvas.
Export the final meme as a PNG file.

Out of Scope:User-uploaded images (all images are pre-provided in /memes/).
Advanced image editing (e.g., filters, cropping, drawing).
User accounts or cloud storage for memes.
Social media sharing integrations.

3. Features and Library OptionsImage Selection:Description: Users select JPEG or PNG images from the /memes/ folder in the project directory. A gallery or dropdown displays thumbnails for selection, and the chosen image loads onto a canvas.
Library Options:React-Grid-Gallery or react-photo-gallery: For displaying image thumbnails in a gallery view.
react-select or react-dropdown: For a dropdown interface if gallery is not preferred.
fs (Node.js File System) or serve-static: For backend access to /memes/ folder.

Text Box Management:Description: Add up to 10 text boxes with:Custom text input.
Font selection (e.g., Impact, Arial, web-safe fonts).
Font size (10px to 100px).
Text color (color picker or hex code).
Optional black/white text outline/stroke.
Drag and resize text boxes.

Library Options:react-draggable: For drag-and-drop text box positioning.
react-resizable: For resizing text boxes with drag handles.
react-color: For color picker functionality.
konva or fabric.js: For advanced canvas-based text manipulation (if HTML5 Canvas alone is insufficient).

Canvas Interaction:Description: Render the selected image and text boxes on a resizable canvas (default 600x600px, adjustable to image dimensions). Maintain aspect ratio and offer optional snap-to-grid for alignment.
Library Options:HTML5 Canvas API: Native canvas for rendering image and text.
konva or fabric.js: For enhanced canvas interactions (e.g., layering, drag-and-drop, scaling).
react-grid-layout: For optional snap-to-grid functionality.

Export Functionality:Description: Export the canvas (image + text boxes) as a PNG file with clear text rendering. Provide a download button.
Library Options:html2canvas: For capturing the canvas and converting it to PNG.
canvas2image: Alternative for canvas-to-PNG conversion.
file-saver: For triggering the PNG download.

User Interface:Description: Clean UI with:Image selection gallery or dropdown.
“Add Text Box” button.
Sidebar for text box properties (text, font, size, color, outline).
Canvas preview area.
Export button.
Responsive design for desktop and mobile.

Library Options:Tailwind CSS or Bootstrap: For responsive, styled UI components.
Material-UI or Ant Design: For pre-built UI components (e.g., buttons, color pickers).
react-responsive: For handling responsive layouts.

Project Folder Integration:Description: Load meme images from the /memes/ folder and display thumbnails for selection.
Library Options:fs (Node.js File System): For reading images from /memes/.
express-static: For serving static images from the project folder.

4. Technical RequirementsFrontend:Framework: React.js (preferred) or Vanilla JavaScript with HTML5 Canvas.
Libraries: See feature-specific libraries above (react-draggable, react-resizable, html2canvas, etc.).
Responsive design using Tailwind CSS, Bootstrap, or similar.

Backend (if needed):Minimal backend (e.g., Node.js with Express) to serve images from /memes/.
Use fs and express-static for file system access.

File Handling:Support JPEG and PNG images in /memes/.

Browser Compatibility:Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge (latest versions).

Performance:Load images and render text boxes in under 2 seconds.
Handle images up to 10MB without crashing.

Dependencies:Use open-source libraries (e.g., html2canvas, react-draggable).
Avoid external APIs (e.g., no reliance on imgflip.com).

5. User FlowUser lands on the meme generator page.
User selects a meme image from the /memes/ folder via a gallery or dropdown.
Image is displayed on the canvas.
User clicks “Add Text Box” to create a text box.
User customizes the text box (text, font, size, color, outline) via a sidebar.
User drags or resizes the text box.
User repeats steps 4–6 for additional text boxes.
User clicks “Export” to download the meme as a PNG.

6. Success MetricsUsability: Create and export a meme in under 2 minutes.
Reliability: 99% of exports produce high-quality PNGs with accurate text.
Engagement: Users add at least 2 text boxes per meme on average.

7. AssumptionsUsers are familiar with drag-and-drop interfaces.
The /memes/ folder contains pre-provided JPEG/PNG images.
No server-side image processing beyond serving files.

8. RisksLarge images in /memes/ may impact performance on low-end devices.
Browser compatibility issues with canvas or drag-and-drop libraries.
Text rendering inconsistencies across browsers.

9. Future EnhancementsGIF export support.
Predefined text box templates (e.g., top/bottom text).
Undo/redo for text box actions.
Categorization or tagging of images in /memes/.

